# USB Stack

## [SoK: "Plug & Play" Today - Understanding USB Insecurity in Versions 1 Through C](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8418652)
```BibTeX
@INPROCEEDINGS{8418652,
  author={Tian, Jing and Scaife, Nolen and Kumar, Deepak and Bailey, Michael and Bates, Adam and Butler, Kevin},
  booktitle={2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP)}, 
  title={SoK: "Plug & Pray" Today – Understanding USB Insecurity in Versions 1 Through C}, 
  year={2018},
  volume={},
  number={},
  pages={1032-1047},
  keywords={Universal Serial Bus;Protocols;Ecosystems;Companies;Authentication;Data transfer;USB;Security;Type C},
  doi={10.1109/SP.2018.00037}}

```

> [!NOTE] Abstract
> **<font style="color:red">in this work, we survey and categorize USB Attacks and Defenses, unifying observations</font>**
> - USB-based attacks have increased in complexity in recent years. **Modern attacks now incorporate a wide range of attack vectors, from social engineering to signal injection**
> 	- **Security response**: A growing set of fragmented defenses.
> - USB attacks often abuse the trust-by-default nature of the ecosystem, and transcend different layers within a software stack; 
> 	- none of the existing defenses provide a complete solution
> 	- solutions expanding multiple layers are most effective.
> - We then develop the first formal verification of the recently released USB Type-C Authentication specification, and uncover fundamental flaws in the specification's design
>
 <font style="color:red">**while the spec has successfully pinpointed an urgent need to solve the USB security problem, its flaws render these goals unattainable.**</font>

- most defenses often focus on protecting a single layer, which proves ineffective against a suite of attacks that appear at many communication layers.
- **misaligned goals between industry and academia further fragment the defense space.**
	- **Commercial solutions** focus on the prevention of data loss and anti-malware without regard for emerging attack vectors
	- **research prototype**s vary and are hamstrung by the lack of built-in security building blocks in the existing USB specifications
		- <mark class="hltr-pink">As a result, research solutions often rely on new host and peripheral architectures that are unlikely to be incorporated into commercial systems.</mark>
### Type C specification
- The new specification enables Type-C authentication, which is intended to provide a way to authenticate a USB device before interacting with it.
- However, it is unclear whether authentication is sufficient to defend against all existing attacks, and what can be done for legacy devices that do not support the new spec.
- had the USB Type-C designers learned from the attacks and defenses of the past, many specification flaws could have been mitigated

### History of USB stack
- usb developed to do stuff
- USB 1.x no security at all
- USB 2.0 The lone exception is the introduction of a new peripheral class called Content Security \[<mark class="hltr-pink">122</mark>], which attempts to provide limited support for securing sensitive content, for example, readings from fingerprint scanners.
- USB 3 \[<mark class="hltr-pink">54</mark>]
- the onus of security onto both the consumers of USB products and the original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), stating:
	-  **1)** "*OEMs decide whether or not to implement these [security] capabilities in their products.*"
	- **2)** "*Consumers should always ensure their devices are from a trusted source and that only trusted sources interact with their devices.*"
- By 2016, the USB-IF could not ignore security for much longer. **In response to the threat of rogue power chargers and cables (<mark class="hltr-pink">18</mark>) enabled by the USB Type-C Specs, the USB 3.0 Promoter Group and the USB-IF itrnoduced the USB Type-C Authentication specification (<mark class="hltr-pink">121</mark>)** 
- Beginning in USB 1.0, the notion of Common Class Specifications \[<mark class="hltr-pink">111</mark>], \[<mark class="hltr-pink">115</mark>] was introduced to codify different kinds of peripherals
	- <mark class="hltr-pink">**EXAMPLES: HID, USB mass storage** 126, 125</mark>


### Threat stuff

> [!NOTE] Threats/attacks points and stats
> - **109:** Stasiukonis reports that in a 2006 penetration test, compromise of the organization was made easy as 75% of USB drives scattered near the workplace had been plugged into company computers within three days
> - **91:** The US Department of Homeland Security replicated this result in a similar experiment where 60% of drives dropped found their way onto a government computer; this number increased to 90% when drivers were branded with a government logo, suggesting that users' low bar for electronic trust can be manipulated by attackers.
> - **129:** Wagenaar et al.'s 2011 “USB Baiting” experiment: demonstrated that users plugged in USB drives and explored their reasons for doing so.
> - **119, 60:** Though one would expect general security awareness to increase over the years, recent work demonstrates empirically that users are _still_ plugging in the USB drives they find.
> 	- Extending other experiments, Tischer et al. planted appearance-modified drives to instigate different human motivation, such as altruism or self-interest.
> 	- The researchers found 98% of drives were picked up from the drop site and that files on 45% of drives were actually opened. The ease of executing such attacks make USB-based social engineering attacks both realistic and dangerous.
> - **75:** In 2011, Ponemon Institute released a study that documented 400 different companies; they found that these companies have lost more than $2.5 million per company because of misplaced USB drives
> - **37:** in 2011, an Australian defense aide lost top secret documents stored on a USB drive in transit through Kuwait
##### 1) Code Injection

USB storage devices have been used to inject malware to a host by several high-profile attacks. Stuxnet [44], [31] allegedly attacked nuclear centrifuge equipment in an airgapped environment; it propagated infection via USB storage drives. Duqu [112] used a user-mode rootkit to hide malicious files on the USB storage device. Con-ficker [106], [45], [94] and Flame [134], [135], [130] used zero-day exploits and malicious autorun.inf files to automatically execute malware when a storage device was connected to the host. Although the auto-run feature was restricted after it became one of the top threats for the Windows platform [79], similar functionality remains available due to bugs in the operating system [71].
##### 2) Data Exfiltration

Since the USB device often does not authenticate the communicating application on the host, the device may send or receive sensitive data to or from an unintended application. This is particularly problematic for sensing devices that can be used to perform surveillance on an unsuspecting user. For example, webcams have been leveraged by both government agencies [87] and malware [28], [101] to obtain information about the computer's user and environment. In the case of malware, the attackers can then demand a ransom payment from the user. Web pages may request that a vulnerable browser enable the microphone without the user's permission, allowing the site to capture audio from the system [113]. Portnoff et al. found that less than half of people noticed that their webcam indicator light illuminated during computer-based tasks [95]. Attacks such as USBee [49], do not provide any indicator visible to the user. USBee permits the exfiltration of data from the host system by turning any USB device connected with the machine into a RF transmitter. Similarly, an exploit of the Linux resource manager [30] allows arbitrary users to bypass system restrictions and access any USB devices on the system.

#### Transport layer BS
##### Masquerading
When a device such as the Rubber Ducky [50], [51] or USBdriveby [65] connects to the host system, all of its interfaces - some of which are intentionally concealed from the user - are enumerated. Hidden functionality can be implemented as additional circuitry into an otherwise innocuous device such as a network adapter in an audio headset. TURNIPSCHOOL [4], adoption of NSA CottonMouth [5], [6] is a modified USB cable that contains an RF transmitter in the plastic around the connector. When the device is connected to a host, the transmitter is enumerated along with the user's expected interfaces. Software running on the host can then exfiltrate data or receive commands via the RF interface. Identifying and mitigating these additional interfaces has traditionally been difficult as an adversary can simply reprogram any USB descriptive data (e.g., VID and PID) to evade device whitelisting or blacklisting rules in the operating system. Furthermore, mitigation is complicated by the legitimate use of composite devices such as audio headsets with both input and output.

Devices do not have to be equipped with new hardware components to be malicious. The lack of authentication for firmware in USB devices allows attackers to overwrite the firmware with malicious code [14]. Devices infected with BadUSB [85], where attackers re-flash the firmware to add more functionalities, for example, can present malicious interfaces as simple as a HID interface or as complex as a network adapter on a USB thumb drive. iSeeYou [24] modifies a we-beam's firmware to disable the indicator light. Psychson [27] modifies the firmware of a USB storage device by adding a keyboard functionality, which can run the malicious script automatically. These attacks are invisible to the user and the resulting modified device can be moved between hosts, leaving a number of host machines exploited.
##### 2) Protocol Corruption

The host's USB software stack generally expects devices to conform to the USB standard. Fuzzing techniques using FaceDancer [47], [103], [63] and debuggers [15] have led to the discovery of a number of kernel-mode arbitrary code execution vulnerabilities, e.g., in the Windows USB drivers [1]–​[3], FreeBSD [23], Linux kernel USB subsystem [10], [99], [20], and other operating systems [38]. In 2017, the _syzkaller_ syscall fuzzer also found more than 40 bugs in Linux kernel USB drivers [48]. In some cases, exploitation of these vulnerabilities can occur during the host's device enumeration, making the physical connection of the device the only barrier to compromise. Man-in-the-middle devices such as embedded systems running USBProxy [41] can manipulate legitimate protocol traffic from devices to inject malicious content

#### Phys layer
##### Signal eavesdropping
- **67** KeyGrabber
- **104** JitterBug
- **82** Neugschwandtner et al. demonstrate that, prior to USB 3.0, a malicious peripheral can eavesdrop on the downstream traffic of all connected devices
- **102** USB snooping attacks leverage current leakage on the powerline of the USB bus to infer data trafic
- **5, 6** CottonMouth
- **77, 11** GPS locator
- **84** many hosts contain internal USB hubs which are often reprogrammable
- **132** Wang and Stavrou demonstrate that USB Request Blocks leak information about the host operating system
- **43** USB protocol analyzer
	- **72** used 43 extract timing features of bus states and use machine learning classification to infer the operating system of the host
- 
##### Signal injection
- **127** SB Killer (and USB Kill 2.0)
- **18** something, idk

### Security stuff
#### Human Layer
- **security awareness**
	- **131** NIST set out standards for using portable devices including USB
	- **7** social engineering awareness
		- **29** posters reinforce that learning
	- **34** 45% of employees receive no corporate security training at all
	- **70, 105** security training is not a panacea for security illiteracy
	- **42** skilled social engineers can circumvent the training
- **on-device data encryption**
	- **59** IronKey
	- **66** Kanguru
	- **40** achieve functionally equivalent properties to on-device encryption by instrumenting the Windows USB subsystem to perform on-the-fly encryption of outbound I/O request packets.
- **on-device host authentication**
	- **25** Kells system
	- **117** ProvUSB
		- also ProvUSB system permits fine-grained audit data to be collected on board
- **Host-or Device-Based Auditing**
	- 22, 74 
	- 17, 64
- **Physically disabling functionalities**
	- **83** IT managers can glue USB ports shut
	- **58** USB condom
#### Application Layer
- 
	- **92** disable auto-run-like functionality and block the execution of unsigned executables or drivers carried on portable media.
	- omposite anti-virus systems:
		- **88** Metascan
		- **86** OLEA
	- **116** USBFILTER: instruments the upper layers of the USB stack, modifying device drivers in order to identify the processes interactive with the device.
		-  can thereby _pin_ devices to specific process ID's, creating a novel defense against application-layer attacks in which malware eavesdrops on USB device traffic to obtain sensitive information (e.g., keystrokes, webcam images).
- **Driver-Based access controls**
	- **116** GoodUSB: onstrain malicious peripherals through incorporating elements of user-driven access control
		- see also **96**
		- it cannot prevent peripherals from making malicious use of their natural drivers (e.g., a malicious keyboard injects keystrokes).
- Device-emulating honeypots
	- **93** Ghost
#### Transport Layer
- **Firmware Verification**
	- **57** Secure USB devices such as IronKey purport to prevent BadUSB attacks
	- **52** FirmUSB applies symbolic execution to find hidden and malicious functionalities inside the firmware
	- **73** VIPER software-based timed challenge-response protocol for verifying peripheral firmware....
	- **26**==In spite of the known difficulty of performing software-based attestation on embedded devices, this approach requires manufacturer support since the device firmware needs to support the attestation.==
- **USB Stack fuzzing**
	- **[81](https://labs.withsecure.com/publications/usb-fuzzing-for-the-masses), [128](https://labs.withsecure.com/publications/usb-attacks-fun-with-plug-and-0wn-t209)** USB fuzzing has long been incorporated into security consultants' threat assessments ([video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-W0JLo4cQO0))
		- **61** conducted on hardware using a PCI evaluation board and the Linux USB Gadget API
	- **[102](https://www.blackhat.com/docs/eu-14/materials/eu-14-Schumilo-Dont-Trust-Your-USB-How-To-Find-Bugs-In-USB-Device-Drivers-wp.pdf)** QEMU-based, parallizable virtual USB fuzzer (vUSBf) that makes use of USB redirection to inject arbitrary noise into different GetDescriptor requests ([ELI5 link](https://www.blackhat.com/docs/eu-14/materials/eu-14-Schumilo-Dont-Trust-Your-USB-How-To-Find-Bugs-In-USB-Device-Drivers.pdf))
	- **48** [Syzkaller](https://github.com/google/syzkaller): a coverage-guided syscall fuzzer that has found bugs in the USB subsystem
	- **90** [POTUS](https://www.usenix.org/conference/woot17/workshop-program/presentation/patrick-evans): combines fault injection, fuzzing, and symbolic execution to detect bugs in USB kernel drivers
	- ==While fuzzing can improve the code quality and raise the bar for attackers, it cannot defend against attacks abusing the USB protocol itself, such as BadUSB attacks.==
- **USB packet firewall**
	- **118** USBFILTER/usbtables: a netfilter/iptables-like stack for filtering USB traffic
	- **62** USBFirewall: focuses on protecting the host USB stack by detecting malformed USB packets, e.g., generated by FaceDancer, based on a formal model of the protocol syntax.
- **Host emulating Honeypots**
	- **116** GoodUSB: To examine a suspicious device, redirects it to a QEMU-KVM virtual machine using USB pass-through.
	- **12** Cinch system: everages virtualization to decrease the host's attack surface.
		- Within the sacrificial VM, a variety of the application and transport layer defense techniques can be deployed including signature-based antivirus, protocol compliance, and user-driven access control.
	- ==While host honeypots are able to detect both application and transport layer attacks, the VM dependency and device operation interruption make them impractical for normal users.==
#### Physicla Layer
- Defenses against physical layer attacks consider anti-fingerprinting as well as implementing confidential communication over the USB bus.
- **Anti-fingerprinting**
	- **16** dditional GetDescriptor requests to confuse the attacker
- **secure channels**
	- **12** Cinch considers adapting encryption and authentication schemes to the physical peripheral connections
	- **82** UScramBle: efends against eavesdropping of downstream traffic by instructing the host to negotiating an encryption key with the device during USB enumeration.

To discover possible vulnerabilities in the design, in this section we formally verify the TCA protocol using ProVerif [21], which has been applied on Signal [69] and TLS 1.3 Draft [19]. Pro Verif uses the concept of _channels_ to model an untrusted communication environment (e.g., the Internet) where adversaries may attack the protocol.
### Take aways and talking points


> [!NOTE] **TAKEAWAY:** Solution Integration
> ecause most existing USB defense solutions focus on a single layer, it is natural to investigate how to combine different solutions covering multiple layers. For instance, combining ProvUSB, GoodUSB, and FirmUSB provides a comprehensive defense from Human to Transport Layer, defeating most software-based attacks. Similarly, USBFirewall can act in combination with USB-FILTER to provide a powerful USB packet firewall for controlling USB device behavior while defending against exploits from malformed packets.


> [!NOTE] **TAKEAWAY:** Type-C Auth. Product Evalution
> While we have shown design flaws of TCA, it is unlikely that we will see a new version of the specfication in the near future, given that the it has just been finalized. There is therefore an urgent need to evaluate the security of these new products, since real-world attacks may provide the impetus for a specification update. It is also possible that vendor-specific implementations have considered those pitfalls in the spec and have offered mitigations which, once verified, will prove convincing.


> [!NOTE] **TAKEAWAY:** Bi-directional Auth. and Mutual Auth.
> While the trust anchor for USB hosts is missing in TCA, a short-term fix is to leverage the trusted hardware available on the host, such as TPM, and implement a host authentication protocol like Kells and ProvUSB. The possibility of doing bidirectional authentication also opens a door to mutual authentication, where the USB host and peripheral authenticate each other.


> [!NOTE] **TAKEAWAY:** Legacy Device Auth.
> To authenticate legacy devices, two techniques are promising, and solve the problem in different ways. USB host fingerprinting has shown the possibility of fingerprinting host machines via the USB interface using machine learning algorithms. The same idea could be applied to USB device fingerprinting, although with the pitfalls of building a robust machine learning system in an adversarial environment. FirmUSB is able to understand the USB device firmware behavior, and providing a stronger security guarantee than fingerprinting when the firmware is available. This combination of fingerprinting and firmware verification can potentially mitigate most attacks from legacy devices.


> [!NOTE] **TAKEAWAY:** Policy Instantiation
> Although security policies have been designed and used in existing solutions such as USBFILTER and Cinch, we need a new policy design that is general enough to be adopted by most vendors and expressive enough to ease creating rich rules. The new design should enumerate a set of subject, object, and access primitives to provide an intuitive mediation abstraction, define a common data marshaling format (e.g., XML, JSON) through which policies can be shared between deployments. It should also describe best practices for policy design, including how policies can preserve security in the presence of legacy devices. This will not only concretize TCA, but also promote USB security as part of systems security solutions, such as SELinux.

Mangler cite. står bare her for at huske det.
\cite{MS-challenge-comparisons} kan sikkert også bruges til mere
#### talking points
> [!example] **Good Talking Points**
> - The term “security” does not appear at all in the USB 1.x specification; the closest related topic is error detection in the cable during transmission. (**ref: 32, 33**)
> - **Throughout the evolution of the USB protocol, security was rarely given consideration. As recently as 2014, the USB Implementors Forum (USB-IF) explicitly stated that security falls outside the scope of the USB specification.**
> 	- (<mark class="hltr-pink">**ref:** 123</mark>) the USB-IF asserted that security is not a legitimate concern because:
> 	   “*In order for a USB device to be corrupted, the offender would need to have physical access to the USB device.*”
> 		- **Not their Job**
> - The ease of use and rapidly declining cost of USB storage devices enables both companies and consumers to use them for storing and transferring sensitive data.
> 	- **On the one hand, their ease of use greatly aids consumers and companies in day to day tasks. On the other, USB devices are the currently de facto method of bypassing technical and personal security precautions and can lead to large, detrimental effects to organizations.**
> - Edward Snowden used a USB drive, for which exit restrictions were lax, to siphon top-secret NSA data from his Hawaii base (**<mark class="hltr-pink">ref: 9</mark>**)
> 	- nother NSA contractor, allegedly placed a USB drive into a classified computer system with the goal of exfiltrating sensitive data, according to a court document (**<mark class="hltr-pink">ref: 46, 120</mark>**)
> - **inter-packet gaps can be used by devices to detect the presence of virtualized environments (<mark class="hltr-pink">ref: 16</mark>)**
> - **<mark class="hltr-red">DMA attacks from USB devices EXCLUDED</mark>** 100, 136
> - **security training is not a panacea for security illiteracy (<mark class="hltr-pink">ref: 70, 105</mark>)**
> -  kiosks are commonly deployed near the entrances of security-sensitive organizations to prevent infected peripherals from entering the facility.
> 	- The Windows Embedded platform \[<mark class="hltr-pink">80</mark>], TMSUI \[<mark class="hltr-pink">133</mark>] and USB Unix Smart Blocker \[<mark class="hltr-pink">40</mark>]
> 		- **but all base their device recognition mechanism on potentially unreliable information reported by the device during enumeration**
> 
> - **The intrinsic flaw enabling all offensive primitives**  was the misguided _trust-by-default_ property underlying the USB ecosystem
> 	- both the host and the device are assumed to be benign and expose all functionality to one another after enumeration.
> 	- **It is therefore not surprising that the majority of viable defensive primitives require the introduction of a trust anchor in order to enable their security properties.**
> 	- Smart device prototypes (**<mark class="hltr-pink">Kells: 25, ProvUSB: 117</mark>**) propose the use of host-side trusted hardware for authentication
> 	- commercial solutions (**<mark class="hltr-pink">IronKey: 59</mark>**) verify user-presented credentials
> 	- <font style="color:red">**a complete solution to USB security will likely require trust anchors on both the host and device sides**</font>
> -  **A recent trend (<mark class="hltr-pink">12, 118, 62</mark>) is that threats in the USB peripheral space can be understood through the lens of network security**
> 	- **118** USBFILTER, **62** USBFirewall
> 	- Similar to the firewall primitive, host-emulating honeypots also expand their defense into different layers.
> 		- **116** GoodUSB, **12** Cinch
> 	- The power of these solutions is rooted in the fact that they are a composition of protection mechanisms within different layers that provide different operational semantics.
> - **<font style="color:red">a complete solution must be able to centralize context from all operational layers prior to issuing security decisions</font>**

## [FirmUSB: Vetting USB Device Firmware using Domain Informed Symbolic Execution](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.09114)

```BibTeX
@inproceedings{Hernandez_2017, series={CCS ’17},
   title={FirmUSB: Vetting USB Device Firmware using Domain Informed Symbolic Execution},
   url={http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3133956.3134050},
   DOI={10.1145/3133956.3134050},
   booktitle={Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security},
   publisher={ACM},
   author={Hernandez, Grant and Fowze, Farhaan and Tian, Dave (Jing) and Yavuz, Tuba and Butler, Kevin R.B.},
   year={2017},
   month=oct, pages={2245–2262},
   collection={CCS ’17} }

```

> [!NOTE] **FirmUSB**
> **a USB-specific firmware analysis framework that uses domain knowledge of the USB protocol to examine firmware images and determine the activity that they can produce**
> - our work demonstrates how lifters into popular intermediate representations for analysis can be built, as well as the challenges of doing so.
> - We develop targeting algorithms and use domain knowledge to speed up these processes by a factor of 7 compared to unconstrained fully symbolic execution
> - We also successfully find malicious activity in embedded 8051 firmwares without the use of source cod

# Machine Learning
## General stuff?
ssss
## Data sets
sss